[Claire] Previously...
You don't intend to live your life
in order to please
other people's expectations.
May I call you by your Christian name?
Why. yes. It's Elspeth.
And I'm Claire.
All I'm asking is that
you contact this Claudel fellow.
encourage him to meet me.
I'll consider it.
You think Frank is torturing you?
I just don't know
what's real or not anymore.
Rob Cameron.
He read my date for time-travel
by accident.
No one on the Ridge kens
of this gold's existence.
Canna let them find out.
Daddy's book warns of a battle
coming to the backcountry.
We'll need a lot more
than just a few hunting rifles.
And Savannah is the place to get them.
Lord John Grey included a letter
of safe passage with his invitation.
You are raising
a Loyalist Militia on my land.
I am.
You are mistaken
if you think I will allow it.
I have reconsidered your plan
to get guns to arm the Ridge.
It'll still be dangerous.
Randall's book says the battle to end
the siege of Savannah
will be on the 9th of October.
Continentals'll fail.
battle'll be bloody. but it willna reach
the center of the city.
so if you wait out the fighting.
you should be safe.
As will Fergus. Marsali.
And the children can stay here with us.
of course.
Take this to Lieutenant Colonel
Francis Marion.
Book says he'll be with
the Continental Army in Savannah.
Has a great deal
of experience with militias.
Might be keen to arm men
from the backcountry.
So. we're starting our own militia?
It's that. or we join Benjamin Cleveland
and his Overmountain men.
I'll be damned if I'll report back
to that murderin' bastard.
You think it'd at least have
the decency to shine. like in a film.
What about bandits?
Do you want to make it into musket balls
like you did the last time?
No. there's no time.
But I do have an idea.
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain and sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say. could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
[Marsali] What's that abominable smell?
It's a wee gift from Jamie
and Claire. It's sauerkraut.
Ugh!
[coughing]
- Oh. [chuckles]
- [Marsali] Mmm.
[laughing]
[speaking French]
[in English] The whiskey.
Not the stench.
It's Da's idea.
Perfect hiding place.
Thank you.
[Marsali] Gold.
[Roger] It's for muskets.
Jamie's forming a militia.
And as an officer in the Continental Camp.
Francis Marion has been known
to arm backcountry Patriots.
We thought it best to leave this
minor detail out of our letter to you.
I don't imagine you intend
to traipse into an army camp
with a king's ransom in bullion?
No. I don't want to invite any trouble.
Nor do I expect Marion
will have crates of guns
just lying around the camp
that he can readily part with.
Arrangements will have to be made.
- So we were hoping you could...
- Aye.
Course you can leave the gold with us.
- Fergus has got plenty o' hiding places.
- Yeah.
I wouldn't be surprised
if you found the Crown jewels.
- Shouldn't be for long.
- It's no trouble.
Now can we please
seal these barrels tightly
until I find some Germans
who will eat this?
[all laughing]
Let us secrete the gold
and drink to our reunion.
It's been too long
since I've tasted milord's divine elixir.
That's good.
To be safe. do you think
you should leave for the camp now?
Dinna fash.
There's plenty of time to find Marion
and be back before the battle.
A wee dram'll speed me on my way.
Cunningham wasn't exaggerating.
He was collecting rents.
trying to ascertain
the loyalties of the surplus
without arousing suspicion.
Most of the families here
are loyal to the Crown.
and those who aren't would be reluctant
to join a militia than oppose it.
[horse snorts]
I canna try to recruit them
without risking it
getting back to Cunningham.
Surely the Ardsmuir men will fight
when it comes to it.
Of course. and a few others.
but it will only be enough
only to recruit men from further afield.
I leave today with Ian and Josiah.
They ken the outposts that are cropped up
while we're away.
Well. you can't keep Cunningham
waiting forever.
I mean. he's going to realize
that you've no intention of joining him.
Wouldn't it be simpler
to just evict him and be done with it?
If I evict him or even kill him.
someone will replace him
or come to avenge him.
No. it's better if I have him close
so I can keep an eye on him.
He told me his commander
is Major Patrick Ferguson.
Frank wrote to the man.
He's the one that formed the Loyalist
militia that fight at King's Mountain.
I still am not sure of Frank's motives
in writing that book.
But what he wrote
is happening before our eyes.
I met Cleveland. and now Cunningham
speaks of Major Ferguson.
Well. that's not proof that you fight.
He could be lying.
The book says that Major Ferguson
is vicious.
Ruthless on the battlefield and off.
Burning the homes of Rebels
without warning. forcing their allegiance.
I'm not certain I will fight. Claire.
but if Cunningham is forming a militia.
we need to be ready.
regardless of the book.
To muskets. liberty and sauerkraut.
mes amis.
- Slainte.
- [all] Slainte.
[Marsali] Mmm.
Strange for a minister
and his wife to smuggle guns. no?
That was Brianna's idea actually.
The last people anyone would ever suspect.
And once we get back to the Ridge.
well. our family has a doctor.
soldier. a minister.
Thought we needed an armorer.
There's me thinking you came
all this way to visit us
and paint a wee picture for Lord John.
It happens I recently received a letter
from His Lordship.
He suggested I meet with one of
his associates. Percival Beauchamp.
- Either of you familiar with this man?
- No.
Mmm-mmm.
He claims to have information
that will be of great interest to me.
But Lord John says
he can be a slippery fellow.
I must make up my own mind
whether what he says is trustworthy.
You know. our mother's
maiden name was Beauchamp?
The English pronounce it "Bee-cham."
but that's a coincidence...
- [glass shatters]
- [screams]
[speaking French]
[tense music playing]
[in English] Cowards!
[speaking French]
[in English] Are you two all right?
I'm... I'm fine. Are you?
Yeah. Didna bother to put a note
this time.
"This time"?
What. this has happened before?
We've had some horrible.
threatening letters.
Filth. Bag full of dead rats.
Another with a serpent.
The bastard escaped.
[Brianna] Wait. what is going on?
[Marsali] Now. when people
dinna like the news.
they tend to blame the printer.
Has someone discovered you're Patriots?
Jamie mentioned
you've been printing for the cause.
The culprit is as likely to be
a Patriot as not.
While. privately. we print pamphlets
for the Rebels.
publicly. we take a more
impartial approach.
Yeah. in trying to not anger one side.
you end up angering both sides.
Just the life of a news printer
in these troubled times.
- Ye have any weapons?
- Aye.
Just the one rifle 'twixt the three of us.
That willna do. not in war. nor hunting
or nothing. but it doesn't matter.
I'm expecting a shipment shortly.
When the time comes.
you'll each have your own musket and shot.
- We'll ride with you. Mr. Fraser.
- Excellent.
Josiah'll take down your names.
- What's your surname?
- Miller.
[Ian] Uncle.
What is it. lad?
Maybe it's nothing.
I've recruited three more men.
There's this Scottish fellow over yonder.
And when he heard I was
from Fraser's Ridge.
he mentioned he was heading there himself.
That he kent Roger and Brianna...
from Scotland.
He says he's looking for them...
- Cameron.
- Aye.
[suspenseful music playing]
[pistol cocks]
I'm James Fraser. I understand
you're acquainted
with my daughter. Brianna MacKenzie.
[man] I am. Aye.
You're Robert Cameron then.
Christ. no. man.
I'm no Rob Cameron.
My name is William Buccleigh MacKenzie.
Come to tell Roger and Brianna that
Cameron won't be bothering them again.
And to return... Roger's wee book.
Don't want it fallin' in the wrong hands
a second time.
Buck MacKenzie.
You remind me of your father.
[horse whinnies]
Perhaps when you've finished
painting Lady Grey.
you could paint a portrait
of Marsali and me.
I'd be happy to.
I'll paint the whole family.
We need to send to Philadelphia
for a canvas big enough.
- [chuckles]
- Don't linger at the Continental Camp.
Talk among the merchants
is that the battle is imminent.
I'll return as soon as I'm able.
- Be safe.
- You too. See you soon.
With any luck. I'll see you both soon.
Good luck.
[rustling]
[wind whistling]
[wood creaking]
Do you think houses are alive?
That was the wind.
[wood continues creaking]
But yes.
I think places
that people live in for a time
absorb a little bit of them.
I often think that houses
affect the people living in them.
so why wouldn't it work both ways?
So. do you think Amy Lindsay's
still in her cabin. haunting it?
I don't know about her cabin exactly.
When people die...
naturally. the people
they leave behind sense them.
You know. sense...
that a part of them
are still with them in a way.
I don't know that I would call
that haunting. though.
It's more like... a memory. a longing.
[softly] I wish Jane would haunt me.
Fanny...
You won't forget her.
And she won't forget you either.
You know. talking about
the people we've lost
can make it seem as though
they're still with us.
[crying softly]
Janie used to whisper
"Good night. ma chérie."
before we went to sleep.
- She spoke French?
- A little.
She said that's what our mother
used to call me. ma chérie.
Janie used to tell me
about our parents before bed.
She was trying to help you
keep the memory alive.
She would tell me good things.
Or funny things.
But we would never talk about...
anything serious.
She talked to the other girls
at the brothel.
I know she was trying to protect me.
Sometimes I wish she hadn't.
- [wind whistling]
- [clattering]
I better go close that window.
[creaking. clattering]
[intriguing music playing]
And your little dog. too.
[Frances] What did you say?
Mrs. Cunningham's coming.
Could you show her in?
I'll be right there.
She's come
for the slippery elm powder
I promised her.
[Frances] Good evening. Mrs. Cunningham.
Do you want to wait in the parlor?
[Elspeth] I most certainly will not wait!
I need help!
[groaning]
Frances. chair.
Go get some whiskey. please.
- What happened?
- Fell.
Tripped over the scuttle like a fool
and fell on my shoulder.
Don't worry.
I can fix it.
I wouldn't have staggered two miles
through buggering brambles
if I didn't think you could.
And where is your son?
[Elspeth] Mmm.
He's away.
[gasps sharply]
[Claire] As I thought. dislocated.
Fanny.
Hold her tight... here.
That's it. Elspeth.
this is going to hurt.
[Elspeth whimpering]
[exhales shakily]
[Claire] All right.
Ready?
[Elspeth whimpers]
- [bone pops]
- [Elspeth gasps]
Grass-combing son of a buggering sod!
What. child?
It's been a long time
since I heard language like that.
Well. if you have to do
with soldiers. young woman.
you acquire their vices
as well as their virtues.
Where. may I ask. did you hear
language like that?
I lived in a brothel.
Indeed.
Well. I suppose whores also have
their virtues as well as their vices.
[Frances] I don't know.
Unless you count being able to satisfy
a man in two minutes by the clock.
[coughs]
Oh. my. I think that would be classed
as a skill rather than a virtue.
Though a useful one. I daresay.
I'm sure everyone has their strong points.
Fanny. would you go to the kitchen
and make up a plate for Mrs. Cunningham?
You know. I have always wondered
about the term "grass-combing."
Is it actual bad language
or is it just descriptive?
Well. it usually applies to someone
who is either idle or incompetent.
Why combing grass should invoke
either attribute is unclear.
but it isn't actually bad language
unless the term "bugger" is applied.
I've never actually
heard it without "bugger."
You must have heard much more
if you were traveling with the army.
Oh. it's worse than you think.
My first husband was a sailor.
Well. I believe you've shocked Fanny.
not with the actual language. but that it
came from a respectable woman such as you.
Well. women tend to be freer in their
speech when there aren't any men present.
She's a remarkable child.
You must try to persuade her not to...
She knows not to talk like that in public.
as I'm sure do you.
[chuckles softly]
But you're free to say anything
you like here tonight.
as I'm not letting you go back
to your cabin in your condition.
By my condition whether you mean
injured or inebriated. I'm not sure.
but in either case. thank you.
William.
Bloody hell. it's you.
[door opens]
William. would you like
to invite our guest in?
She's had quite a long journey.
Forgive me. Mrs. MacKenzie.
The unexpected pleasure of seeing you
again has caused me to forget myself.
I was delighted when you accepted
my invitation. my dear.
I was beginning to fear
I'd never see you again.
Feels like a lifetime since we all met.
Allow me to introduce Amaranthus.
Viscountess Grey. My late nephew's widow.
A pleasure.
I'm sorry for your loss.
Lord John mentioned
he'd sent for a portrait painter.
Didn't realize it would be a woman.
You must be very skilled
for him to ask you to come.
- Where is it you traveled from?
- North Carolina.
Well. surely you did not
undertake the journey alone.
I was under the impression that
your husband would be accompanying you.
He did. but he's currently attending
to an errand outside the city.
It's time for Trevor's bedtime feed.
It was a pleasure. Mrs. MacKenzie.
Yes. well. uh. various important matters
require my attention.
So I will leave you two
to become reacquainted.
[both chuckle softly]
You came from North Carolina?
Last we met.
you were on your way to Boston.
These are dangerous times.
We thought it best to be with family.
so we returned to Fraser's Ridge.
You must have met Fanny. then.
- Is she well?
- [laughs happily] Yes. she is.
My mother has taken quite a liking to her.
So has my father.
Well. I mean. our father.
[scoffs lightly]
Did you know?
The day we met in Wilmington.
did you know what we were to each other?
I did.
I wanted to tell you.
Roger. my husband. was with me.
He was just around the corner at the inn.
And my children. Jem and Mandy.
I...
really wanted you to meet them.
Even if you didn't know we were...
well. yours.
Mine?
I should probably say something polite
like. "Only if you want us." but that's...
A bit late for that.
To lie about the truth. I mean.
I do apologize for not telling you.
But Lord John and Da
felt so strongly that...
It wasn't my place.
I accept your apology.
Though. in all honesty.
I'm glad you didn't tell me.
I wouldn't have known how to respond
to such a revelation at the time.
Hmm.
And you do now?
- No. I bloody don't.
- [laughs]
But I haven't blown my brains out.
When I was 18. I might have.
I apologize.
I didn't mean that with any derogatory
reference to you or your family.
Your family. you mean.
[Percival] Thank you for coming.
Allow me to send for wine.
No. thank you.
Came to hear what you have to say.
but I must get back to my work.
Very well then. sir.
I'll get right to it.
I wish to acquaint you
with the facts of your birth.
Facts I think you do not know.
Have you heard of a man
by the name of le Comte St. Germain?
Why?
You are his son.
I'm sure you'll have an explanation
as to how you came to this
preposterous conclusion.
As you may have surmised.
I am not French myself.
I have. however. married
into a prestigious French family.
My wife is the sister
of the Baron Amandine.
and as with any old dynasty.
there is a sordid family secret.
Many years ago. my wife's older sister
began a torrid affair with the Comte.
and not long after disappeared.
fled into the night with her jewels
and they supposed into
the arms of another lover.
I take it you wish me to believe
I'm the result of this tryst.
Perhaps the name of the woman
in question will convince you.
Amélie LeVigne Beauchamp.
[speaking French]
[in English] Yes.
Yes. She is dead.
You may continue.
A few years ago. I uncovered the truth
from one of the Comte's servants.
Amélie did not run away with a lover.
The Comte simply grew weary of her
and learning she was pregnant.
lured her away from home.
drugged her with opium
and sold her to a brothel.
Maison Elise.
That is where she gave birth to a child.
You.
Et Monsieur le Comte?
He was last seen more than 30 years ago.
And while no body was found.
the circumstances of his disappearance
were so mysterious
that a magistrate declared him deceased.
His estate is currently held in trust
by a solicitor in Paris.
But it would undoubtedly be released
should a petition be filed by his heir.
Unless the law in France has
changed of late.
a bastard cannot inherit properties. so...
Claudel. If I may use your original name.
You may not. sir.
Very well.
I found this. hidden in the pages
of a dusty family Bible.
I'm quite certain I'm the only one living
who knows of its existence.
It is a contract of marriage.
It appears Amélie relinquished
her virtue at a high price
by demanding the Comte marry her in secret
before welcoming him to her bed.
Allow me to congratulate you. sir.
You are not a bastard.
Assuming the document isn't forged.
plainly. you have something
you want out of this.
Something Monsieur le Comte's heir
might accomplish for you?
Le Comte St. Germain owned his estate.
still does own a majority
of the stock of a syndicate
investing in land in the New World.
The main asset of which is a large parcel
in what is known as the Old Northwest.
Some interests of mine in Paris
believe that while Britain
is preoccupied with this rebellion.
there is an opportunity
to establish a French colony
on the land with French settlers.
Unfortunately. le Comte's solicitor
refuses to sell the stock at any price.
But if a legitimate heir were to appear.
the land would become his.
And my associates would pay said heir
a significant sum for said land.
A significant sum.
Have I done something to offend you?
I'm simply trying to enjoy
my literature in solitude.
Should you require company.
perhaps Mrs. MacKenzie will oblige you.
Lady Grey. are you jealous?
Don't be absurd.
Though anyone with eyes can see that
there's a history between the two of you.
[scoffs]
I suppose you're right.
She's a person of some
significance in my life. but...
Please.
I thought we...
[chuckles nervously]
It doesn't matter.
It was foolish.
Miss MacKenzie...
Brianna is my sister.
You told me you didn't have any siblings.
[sighs]
I'm a bastard.
Well. I'm not legally a bastard
since the Eighth Earl of Ellesmere
and my mother were married
when I was born.
But the Eighth Earl was not my father.
The man who sired me was...
is. Brianna's father.
Well. whoever he was.
he must have been a...
a very striking gentleman.
He is.
Has he acknowledged you?
Not publicly. no.
Nor do I want him to.
He owes me nothing.
I'm only telling you this
because you asked.
Because I enjoy your company.
May I be so bold
as to presume you enjoy mine?
That is bold.
Though perhaps not incorrect.
Well...
I think it only fair one comprehends
a person whose company one enjoys.
I am not the Ninth Earl of Ellesmere.
Not really.
I never was.
Of late. I've found myself wishing I could
renounce the damn title altogether.
though English law
makes that all but impossible.
Well. you may not be able to renounce it.
but you could hand it on.
abdicate in favor of your heir. I mean.
I don't have an heir.
Well. you could marry me
and give it to our firstborn.
I'm a widow after all.
We could retire into private life
and breed Dachshunds.
I can't imagine anything more tiresome.
Surely you don't mean to imply that being
married to me would be tiresome. William.
You might just possibly enjoy it.
Thank you. Amaranthus...
for not thinking less of me.
As I've told you. I'm the daughter
of F. Cowden. bookseller.
That's all my father is to the world.
I thought I would be a merchant's wife.
But now I am Viscountess Grey.
And my son will be the Duke of Pardloe.
While you may disagree. I believe
a title is something you simply have.
Not something you are.
By law. you are the Earl of Ellesmere.
That's all the world needs to know.
[gentle music playing]
But you're not only that. William.
Not to me.
How's the pain?
In my shoulder or my head?
Both. I suppose.
Bearable.
[clattering]
Though I wish the girl
would refrain from slamming doors.
That's not Fanny.
She's taking milk over to Evan Lindsay's.
- Then who?
- Houses make sounds. Elspeth.
And all I know is that when
the wind is in the east.
ours makes that particular
noise from the attic.
Why build an attic in the first place?
Because my husband
is the Fraser of Fraser's Ridge.
If there should ever be
any kind of emergency
that causes our tenants
to leave their home.
well. then they can take
refuge here with us.
And what kind of an emergency
might that be?
Your son.
- Do you believe what he says about...
- My grandson's death?
Yes. I do believe him.
It is a comfort.
I was thinking specifically about
what he said to him.
That he. your grandson. would see Charles
again in seven years' time.
Do you believe that?
I only know that he believes it.
[knocking at door]
Good day. Mrs. Fraser.
I'm here to collect my mother.
I'll help her get her things.
No need. I'll do it myself.
You'll find her through here.
Mother. are you well?
I heard that you were injured.
Yes. my shoulder.
But Mrs. Fraser was able
to heal it quite satisfactorily.
She's been most hospitable.
I've enjoyed the company.
Her husband's away
at the moment on business.
Is he? I had wondered.
He's a hard man to pin down. your husband.
We had been meaning to talk.
Or so I thought.
[chuckles nervously]
Well. he's anxious to speak with you. too.
But this business couldn't wait.
Well. I thank you. ma'am.
for the care you've shown my mother.
She should be fully recovered
within a week or so.
But here are some herbs
that should ease her discomfort.
You have a very fine home.
It must feel very empty with him away
and you here all alone.
I'm fine. I can assure you.
I expect him home at any moment.
I'll let him know you stopped by.
[tense music playing]
- Charles. did you bring the cart?
- Of course. Mother.
Until next time. Mrs. Fraser.
[door opens. closes]
Do you think he's telling you the truth?
He very well may be.
Amélie. I knew her. but I...
[exhales]
I didn't know she was my mother.
There are many children born in a brothel.
The little ones. they would call
any whore maman.
Anyone who would feed them.
And if a whore had to attend a customer
and a child was hungry. she'd just
hand him to another jeune fille.
Amélie. they call her "The Baroness"
for her haughty manner.
Even then. I knew the name was cruel.
but until today.
I didn't realize how cruel.
Was she kind to you?
She detested all of the children
of the brothel. but...
me most of all.
I understand now.
I was the spawn of the man who took
everything from her.
Her love.
Her freedom.
Even her family.
I think I was maybe six years old
when she died.
She contracted the morbid sore throat.
I remember she summoned me to her chamber.
What did she say?
[speaking French]
[in English] Be a good boy.
[scoffs]
It wasna fair for her to blame you
for what happened to her.
I wouldn't expect fairness from one
whose life was filled
with so much cruelty.
At the hands of such a villain.
Le Comte St. Germain. in France.
he tried to kill milady.
And now to learn that he sired me...
You are not him.
I know that better than anyone. my love.
But if you are truly his heir. then
you can use what he has left you for good.
If you take this Beauchamp
up on his offer...
That man is a whore.
I should know.
He's likely been one all his life.
Monsieur Beauchamp is too old
to sell his arse.
but he would sell himself from necessity.
All he's asking. though.
is that you sell him some land. no?
Land that you have a right to by birth.
Yes. but why?
What effect will that have selling it
to these interests in Paris?
He wants to install a French colony
on American soil. but...
we've devoted ourselves
to the Patriot cause.
We're not fighting
to be free of a British king
just to become servants of a French one.
You dinna ken it'll come to that.
You don't know that it won't.
That isn't everythin'.
I ken you. Fergus Fraser.
Why is this offer so difficult
to consider?
To claim this inheritance. this land.
I must publicly acknowledge
that le Comte St. Germain was my father.
Monsieur Beauchamp told me
what every orphan wants to hear.
That I'm the son of a great man.
But I'm already the son of a great man.
[distant explosions]
Do not worry. my dear.
A French warship. the Truite. has taken
to firing her cannon on occasion.
A dreadful nuisance.
She's anchored on the far end
of Hutchinson Island.
out of range to do any damage
here in town.
I assure you. you're perfectly safe.
[distant explosions continue]
Oh. glad to hear it.
So why didn't you
tell William I was coming?
Because. um...
Because I didn't know how he would react.
It seems William has been lost since
he learned the truth of his parentage.
But. you and he share
a rather unique experience
discovering that James Fraser
is your father.
So that's why you invited me here.
not to paint a portrait of Amaranthus.
You think I can help William.
[hesitates] I do think that a portrait
of his grandchild and daughter-in-law
will do my brother the world of good.
But... yes.
If there's anyone who can talk
some sense into William
about his present difficulties. it's you.
You could've just told me the truth.
you know.
I would have come anyway.
I don't believe you've been
entirely truthful with me. either.
Or should I ask precisely what errands
your husband has outside the city?
Does it perhaps have something to do with
the Continental Army encampment there?
[clears throat]
I could have been more direct
about my intentions for this visit.
but I couldn't take the chance
you'd rebuff me now.
If there's one trait that James Fraser
has successfully passed
to all his children. it's stubbornness.
and it's exceedingly difficult
to get you to do anything
you don't want to do.
William... William is the same
My late wife. Isobel. told me that William
was lost once on his estate in Helwater.
He was. um. three or so.
He was wandering alone
in a fog on the fells.
Sometimes I see that. Sometimes...
Other things.
You see those things when you're a parent.
Yeah.
I can't make any promises.
But I will see what I can do.
Thank you.
Thank you. my dear. [kisses]
- [baby crying]
- Shh. shh. shh.
Jem and Mandy were a delight.
Rodney and wee Claire can't wait
for their next...
- What do they call it? A "sleepover"?
- [Claire chuckles]
Well. I'm glad they weren't a nuisance.
Never.
Every child's a miracle.
You all right. Rachel?
Yes.
Thee is right. Of course. Lizzie.
Every child is a miracle.
Though. in Oggy's case. the miracle is how
long he can scream without drawing breath.
Sometimes he sounds just like a catamount.
We've all been there.
- Mandy. look.
- [Mandy] Grandda! Grandda!
[Jemmy] Come on!
Come on! They're coming!
Quick. quick. quick!
They're certainly happy
to see their grandda.
Who's that with him?
I have no idea.
[Mandy] Buck!
[chuckling]
[Buck grunts]
Children! Come here!
How are you?
- Granny. look. it's our cousin!
- [Mandy] Buck. It's Buck!
Sassenach. may I introduce to you.
William Buccleigh MacKenzie.
Claire Fraser. your reputation
precedes you.
As does yours.
You must have had
a very long journey indeed.
Longer than I ken how to explain.
I told him he's welcome to stay on
the Ridge as long as he likes.
Of course. You're family.
Come along. Come inside.
- I'm sure you both must be starving.
- Aye.
You don't happen to have any of those
peanut butter sandwiches. do you?
What's troubling you. mo chroi?
There was a massacre. Up north.
A Mohawk leader. Joseph Brant.
and a Loyalist captain.
led a raid on a Rebel town.
I ken Joseph Brant.
The Continentals retaliated
by sending an army after him.
"Patriot Army marched along
the Susquehanna River.
razing every Indian village
they could find.
Forty villages were left in flames.
and countless scalps were..."
Christ.
Is that not where Shadow Lake lies?
Where thy former wife...
Wahionhaweh.
Aye.
And thy son.
[speaking other language]
Swiftest of Lizards.
Rachel.
I must go north.
I need to know what happened to them.
Of course you must go.
And Oggy and I will come with thee.
[birds chirping]
I'm going to miss this little catamount.
Going to be so much bigger
by the time you return.
Is there really nothing I can say
to convince you and Oggy to stay?
I thank thee. Claire. but no.
Would thee let thy husband
travel alone 700 miles
to rescue his first wife?
You make a good point.
I pray that we find Emily
and her children safe.
But when he sees them.
I want to be by his side...
so he doesn't forget the life he has here.
Does that make me wicked?
No. Rachel.
That makes you human.
[Oggy cooing]
Here.
Come.
Rachel says you mean to stop
in Philadelphia
so she can go to a proper meeting?
Aye. She's missed it.
I'd like you to go to the brothel there.
The one Frances lived wi' your sister.
Speak with some of the lasses.
A brothel?
It's not enough
I'm going to find my first wife?
It's to do with Frances.
Ask 'em about Jane.
Anything she said about her family.
We'd like Frances to ken more about them.
I'll find out what I can.
I. uh...
I must say one more thing
to you before you go.
You ken the book Brianna brought back?
The one written by her other father?
Aye. She told me...
Frank Randall?
It's about Scots in America.
About what they...
What we will do in the Revolution.
There's mention of a battle
in the backcountry
at a place called King's Mountain.
I've heard of this place.
Frank says I fight in it.
When will it happen?
October next.
So he says.
Claire thinks
he's bending the truth. but...
I'm more and more convinced he's not.
I'll be there with you. Uncle.
There'll be time enough for me
to do what's needed
in the north and make it home.
Hey. dinna fash.
My da may be gone. but I'll guard
your left in his stead.
Thank you. lad.
[somber music playing]
May you be safe on your journey.
[speaking Gaelic]
[speaking French]
- [in English] Afternoon.
- [Roger] Col. Marion.
I'm Reverend Roger MacKenzie.
I apologize for interrupting you. but...
you're a difficult man to find.
and my request is urgent.
You here to volunteer?
The Continental Army isn't choosy.
But I have to say.
the occasional minister we do get
doesn't usually wear
his best clothes to fight in.
No. sir.
I've come to request your assistance.
My father-in-law owns
ten thousand acres in North Carolina.
A British major named Patrick Ferguson
has been stirring up trouble
in the backcountry.
raising the Loyalist militias.
And as we are Patriots. we've decided
to assemble a militia of our own.
But we need weapons.
I believe you've helped
arm others like this before.
Mmm-hmm.
I can pay you.
I think we could possibly
reach an agreement.
Well. I have a letter from
my father-in-law with the particulars.
Your father-in-law
is General James Fraser?
Aye.
Fellow who abandoned his troops
at Monmouth to tend his wife.
Aye.
James Fraser is an honorable man. sir.
and a very brave soldier.
The battle was already won
when his wife was shot.
Is it true he signed
his letter of resignation
on the back of a corporal in mud?
Actually. he wrote it in his wife's blood.
but. aye.
He didn't have a choice.
She was wounded when General Lee
ordered him to leave her side. which...
I'm sure the circumstances
were quite extraordinary.
The fact remains that if it had not been
for Lee's trial and Lafayette's good word.
Fraser would've been court-martialed
after Monmouth. perhaps even hanged.
Sir. our people are in danger.
Our circumstances here
are quite dire as well.
We have precious few resources.
even with the assistance
of our new French allies.
I can't afford to give what I do have
to someone who's already lost
the Continental Army's trust.
Surely his years of service
and sacrifice to the cause...
My answer is no.
Reverend MacKenzie. And it's final.
- Then I'll take my leave. sir.
- That's not possible. I'm afraid.
- I beg your pardon?
- We assault the city in a few days' time.
General Lincoln has ordered sentries
to detain anyone leaving camp
in an effort to prevent the deserters
from warning the British.
You can't leave.
I've come to ask for your help
in fighting the British.
But surely you don't...
think that I'm going
to leave here and assist them?
I have my orders. Reverend MacKenzie.
Sir. My wife is in the city.
I promised I'd return.
Every man here has made such a promise
to his wife. his mother. his son.
Many will not live to honor them.
You might.
I can find a safe place
for you to wait out the battle.
Unless you want to fight.
I can give you a good rifle.
No.
Well...
Stay here and wait then.
Things go wrong. you can help bury us.
Sir. wait.
[hesitates] I'm no good with a rifle.
But if you can give me a sword.
I'll fight with you.
[patriotic music playing]
[patriotic music continues]